# Urda-Garcia_et_al._2020
Code for the manuscript 'From comorbidities to gene expression fingerprints and back'

## Data
The data is publicly available (Supplementary Table 1). The raw data can be downloaded from GEO ([https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/)) and the counts can be downloaded from the GREIN platform ([http://www.ilincs.org/apps/grein/](http://www.ilincs.org/apps/grein/)).

## Steps and Code
### Analyzing disease similarities based on gene expression at the disease level
1. Run the RNA-seq pipeline at the disease level
```bash
run_rnaseq_pipeline_for_disease.R
```
2. Explore functional enrichment and produce it's heatmap-based visualization
```bash
molecular_insight_heatmap.R
```
3. Generate the networks
- Obtain the distance between all pairwise comparisons
```bash
build_disease_level_network.py
```
- Generate and analyze the Disease Similarity Network (DSN) using the predefined distances
```bash
generating_networks.R
```
4. Compute the overlap of our networks with the health electronic records-derived network from Hidalgo et al. (Hidalgo et al., 2009)
```bash
network_overlap.R
```
5. Analyze the obtained networks in terms of their topological properties
```bash
analyzing_networks.R
```

6. Run the entire anlysis and compute the overlap at the ICD9 level
- Merge the initial data to group diseases that correspond to the same ICD9 code `generating_SE_objects_icd9_level.R`
- Run the RNA-seq pipeline for each ICD9 code `prepare_pipeline_runs.R` & `run_rnaseq_pipeline_for_disease.R`
- Compute the distances between each ICD9 pairs `build_ICD_level_network.R`
- Generate the networks `generating_networks.R`
- Compute the overlap `network_overlap_icd.R`

7. Compare the DSN at the ICD9 level with the Diseases Molecular Similarity Network generated by Sánchez-Valle et al. based on microarray data (Sánchez- Valle et al., 2020)
```bash
Overlap_microarrays.R
```

### Analyzing disease similarities based on gene expression at the meta-patient level
1. Generate the meta-patients
```bash
defining_meta_patients.R
```
2. Run the RNA-seq pipeline at the meta-patient level
```bash
DEanalysis_for_metapatients.R
```
3. Build the Stratified Similarity Network (SSN) that connects meta-patients and diseases
- Obtain the distance between all pairwise comparisons
```bash
build_metapatient_disease_network.py 
```
- Generate the networks using the predefined distances
```bash
generating_networks.R
```
5. Analyze the obtained network in terms of their topological properties
```bash
analyzing_networks.R
```
### Shiny app for DSN and SSN visualization and community detection

ANALYSIS/shiny_network_app

### Differential Variability Analysis
1. Perform Differential Variability Analysis for each disease
- Obtain the deltaDM for each gene and disease
```bash
exploring_variance_distribution_disease_level.R 
```
- Obtain the significance of each value
```bash
compute_DM_pvalues.R 
```
2. Analyze the correlation of the metric Distance to Median (DM) with sample size and average gene expression.
```bash
DM_behaviour.R
```
3. Perform functional enrichment and produce it's heatmap-based visualization
```bash
molecular_insight_heatmap.R
```
4. Generate the disease-disease network based on differential variability
- Obtain the distance between all pairwise comparisons
```bash
build_disease_level_network.py
```
- Generate and analyze the network using the predefined distances
```bash
generating_networks.R
```
5. Compute the overlap of our networks with the health electronic records-derived network from Hidalgo et al. (Hidalgo et al., 2009)
```bash
network_overlap.R
```

### References
Hidalgo,C.A. et al. (2009) A Dynamic Network Approach for the Study of Human
Phenotypes. PLoS Comput. Biol.

Sánchez-Valle,J. et al. (2020) Interpreting molecular similarity between patients as
a determinant of disease comorbidity relationships. Nat. Commun., 11.

